Guide to becoming a bicyclist in San Francisco.



Hello there! My name is Eduardo and I would like to show you how to use your bicycle to save money, maybe some time, explore other parts of the city, make a grocery run, and just generally have a greater freedom of movement.



"The only chains that give you freedom, are on a bicycle." - Unknown



A lot of people think that a bicycle is an impractical choice for commuting, because of safety issues and their own thought that they can't bicycle that long or that far. Let me tell you, living in San Francisco, it is TOTALLY practical. Using Muni and paying $5 a day, I really only went to where I /needed/ to go. With a bicycle, I went where I /wanted/ to go and for free! I've never been on the Golden Gate bridge, to Embarcadero, and to the Golden Gate Park and Presidio /before owning any bicycles/ and I lived in San Francisco for a whopping 26 years.



How did I get into bicycles in the first place? Simply put, a MUNI ticket did. I was taking the 8 line to meet with one of my web design clients and I saw the 8 go across the street, I ran to catch the rear door. I managed to get on and walk into a sardine-packed bus. A few stops later there were MUNI inspectors and unfortunately, unable to move toward the front of the bus, did not have a ticket. I was charged $120 and that was a very sour day for me as a budget-conscious individual. The day after fighting the ticket, I decided to look at alternatives. I looked at my average traveling distance and saw that I only needed to travel about 8 miles total (I used to live closer to where I worked). It looked so far to walk and then thought about the bicycle. My family was against using bicycles because they thought it was too dangerous. I knew that it was a risk to take, especially for someone that didn't know anything about bicycles. In November 2018 I decided to buy my first bicycle on Craigslist, a small folding bike, and that is when I had my second life-changing moment (the first being the computer when I was 11 years old).



commute line photo



I practically ride into Twin Peaks across San Francisco for 6 miles, back and forth... daily... and I'm 40 pounds overweight...



Don't buy upgrades, ride up grades. - Eddy Merckx



If you don't own a bicycle, that's okay too, I will give you tips on how to safely and ethically pick a used bicycle for your daily use! If you go online to buy a bicycle, you might be surprised at the prices of some of these bicycles, some going anywhere from $1000 all the way up to $10,000! Let me tell you, I own five bicycles already and have spent less than $1000 on all of them.



"Bicycling is a big part of the future. It has to be. There's something wrong with a society that drives a car to workout in a gym." - Bill Nye



My first bicycle is a folding Schwinn Loop that I bought on Craigslist for $50.

My second bicycle is a folding Montague Paratrooper that I bought on Craigslist for $200.

My third bicycle is a Vilano Aluminum Road Bike that I negotiated with The Bike Kitchen for $70.

My fourth bicycle is a Diamondback full suspension bicycle that I got for free at The Bike Kitchen by volunteering!

My fifth bicycle is another folding Montague Paratrooper that I negotiated with The Bike Kitchen for $200.



Diamondback photo



This is Undying Scarlet, it is a 15-year-old bicycle and it is dying... it is my favorite bicycle out of all my bicycles and it was free!



So far that comes to a total of $520 for just the bicycles! Something is wrong with me so don't worry, the average person just needs one good bicycle. The reason I ended up with five bicycles is that I read online that its recommended to have a backup bicycle if your daily commuter bicycle breaks down or gets stolen. That way I can still bike to work if something happens to my primary bicycle. I only really needed two though...



I will order this guide for people who have existing bicycles in the closet and then get into purchasing and maintaining later on.



Gear to use for your bicycle.



Let me get something out of the way, while riding a bicycle has amazing benefits, there is one big downside to it and that is the lethality when being in an accident. If you've taken physics class you will understand that when two bodies collide, the smaller mass will absorb most of the energy. The big downside here is that the average bicycle weighs 40 pounds while the average car weighs 4000 pounds. When a bicycle and car collide, generally it is not the best situation to be in for either side.



This means that as a bicyclist, we must depend A LOT more on /preventative/ measures. The biggest problem with bicyclists is visibility. So, therefore, I recommend you get these basic items for your daily bicycle commute:



* Bicycle helmet

* Reflective vest

* Front light

* Rear light

* Rear view mirror



/Bicycle reflectors don't work very well!/

Although bicycle reflectors are great basic items to have on a bicycle, you should never depend on them. Reflectors need light to be visible, the farther you are the less light they can reflect. They also reflect light only at certain angles so very few cars and people can actually see your reflectors compared to lights.



/Don't ride at night, AT ALL/

I have a long commute and I would love to stay later where I work but my experience with night bicycling was scary. Over a three-month period, I've had 3 near-collision events at intersections. During three days I decided to bike home later when it was pretty much dusk. I had three near-collisions at intersections during two of those night-riding days. Two things I've learned from this, the first is that almost all accidents happen at merging and intersections, and the second is that perpendicular cars can't see you until you are right in front of them, the worst place to be for an accelerating car!



/Don't be unpredictable/

A lot of bicyclists that I see on the road tend to ignore stop signs, the major reason is it is hard to start a bicycle and get it up to speed (this is the same reason cars have a city and highway mileage, it takes more power to start than to continue moving). I will leave it up to you on how you want to handle yourself on the road, but I personally recommend to respect stop signs and especially traffic lights. I will always signal even if there is no one behind me (good habit building), and I will not make strange manuevers that can confuse others. Most cars will signal you that they are yielding to you, but keep in mind maybe the car on the opposite side did not and may crash into you!



Gears on your bicycle



Most people nowadays ride automatic cars so the idea of "gears" may seem foreign. Look at your bike and you should see multiple discs on the rear wheel with teeth on it. This is the "cassette" of a bicycle, it allows you to exchange power for speed and vice versa. On the rear wheel, the biggest gear (closest to the wheel itself) lets you climb hills, but you aren't gonna go fast. The smallest is to go fast, but it's harder to pedal (best for when you are already moving). Most common bicycles also have two or three of these in the pedal area of the bicycle. These are call chainwheels, I don't know why we have two names for the same thing, but these work the same as the cassette on the rear except backwards. The largest chainwheel lets you go faster, and the smallest lets you put more power.



If you are a beginner in switching gears I recommend you put the chain on the middle chainwheel (the ones between the pedals), or the smallest if you only have two. Focus on learning how to switch the rear only.



Tip: Never apply a lot of torque when you change gears, if you hear crunching noises when you change gears, it means you are putting too much power while changing gears. You want to spin the pedals so that the chain goes on the new gear and then apply power. This will happen a lot to newbies (it did to me!) but over time you will start to get it.



Prepping your gears at an intersection



The big downside to most bicycle gears is that you cannot change them while you are not moving, becuase the gears change only when they rotate. You can of course change them by getting off, lifting the rear wheel, and spin the pedals by hand, but this takes a lot of time. When I see an upcoming intersection, I "drop" my gears, meaning I will set them so it's easiest to start pedalling (similarly to hill climbing). At the beginning, practice changing your rear gears and once you have that down you can take a shortcut by dropping the front chainwheels (between your pedals) or a combination of both. I still see to this day daily bicyclists struggling to start their bike at an intersection while I just start pedalling and leave everyone behind.



Mentality for riding bicycles next to cars.



Although I love the idea of a world where laws are respected and everyone has rights that are not violated, unfortunately this is not the world we live in. While a bicycalist has the same rights to use the same roads as a motor vehicle, it is not a smart idea to go on a road where cars go 35MPH up a hill while you are stuck climbing it at 5MPH, I mean legally you can, but someone is gonna get mad and give you a bump!



When you ride your bicycle to work you need to think about what streets to take, generally the quiet streets that no one uses. You can use Google maps to see where there are bike lanes and try those first. After a little trailblazing, you will start to explore adjacent streets that no one uses, these are your roads. You will be amazed at how much traffic most streets get compared to the streets everyone is trying to get into.



When you start you will get something called "fear from the rear" and this is from a car engine that's behind you that you think is getting impatient and might want to overtake you, without you knowing how it's moving. This is where that rear view mirror comes in, it's designed to calm you down and let you know what's happening. I understand my limitations on a bicycle and I understand people are busy and trying to get to places, and while I know bicyclists that will use the full lane because they legally can, I generally continue until I can find a place I can "pull over" to let the cars behind me pass me. The rear view mirror also has another benefit of letting you know when the road is all yours so you can go at a slower and easier speed if you want!



Survival Mode

When you get into more traffic-y areas, you are going to practice something that I call Survival Mode. Simply put, every car out there that you are not looking at, wants to kill you (like that little ghost in Super Mario). This puts you in the habit of quickly scanning your horizon for all vehicles, the mirror of parked cars so you don't get "doored", traffic lights, markings on the roads, stop signs, etc. This seems like a lot of information to take in at the beginning so I recommend looking at the most obvious vehicles first, the closest ones to you. Do not "stare" at a single car while crossing an intersection, you aren't paying attention to cars on the other side of your vision!



If you don't feel safe at all on the road, get on the sidewalk, while it is technically illegal in San Francisco to ride bicycles on sidewalks, it's generally safer, just keep in mind you are now the danger to pedestrians so match pedestrian speed. Pedestrians have right of way ANYWHERE so respect their space, you are on their territory.



Blindspots: identify them and practice being careful near them. If you can't see them, they can't see you either.



Let it go

If you see a car doing something really dumb, or something that "gets in your way" like a car parked in the bike lane, don't get mad, it's not worth it. Some people do, and it's a little funny, but you should be paying attention on how to handle the new situation. For example the parked car in the bike lane (which is pretty common during commute hours) instead of slowing down and hitting their mirror out of sheer hate (it happens and you may witness it!), signal that you want to merge to the left, look at your mirror or look behind you to see when it's safe, and go around the parked car. You will get to your destination faster this way too! When a person is too focused on something (like the parked car's mirror), you start to lose focus on the things around you that can hit you.



Real Survival!

Bring water, trust me you WILL get thirsty! Also, a smartphone helps so you are free to get "lost" without really getting lost in the city. And of course, money if you REALLY get lost!



A safe bicycle is a good bicycle

Generally, you want to make sure a bicycle is solid and not falling apart. The most important thing on a bicycle is the brakes. I don't care if both of your tires are flat, if your brakes don't work, don't ride it. You can easily check your brakes before each ride by squeezing each brake lever and trying to move the bike forward by hand. If it doesn't move you are good to go. If it easily moves, the brakes aren't working! Test each brake separelty, not together at the same time.



Work dress and sweat

One common reason most people don't ride is because of sweat. If you need to dress really fancy for you work, dress at work. Put your clothes and a towel in bicycle panniers, sweat like your life depended on it, and then change in the bathroom at work. I seem to only sweat mostly on my chest, back, and head so all I carry is an extra shirt and a towel, and change shirts when I get to work. Tip: I put my sweaty shirt in a plastic bag so the sweat doesn't get into my backpack or panniers.



Enjoying your bicycle



I used to wonder why dogs liked car rides, well after riding a bicycle, I understand exactly why they like it. Using a bicycle is an amazing experience. Have you ever heard birds while driving to work? Tired of waiting for the bus or stuck in traffic? Have you ever really looked at San Francisco other than the roads you take? A Bicycle, takes you to places you want to go and there is a lot less to worry about when you get there (like parking, fuel, time limits, or finding the right MUNI line nearby). With a bicycle you don't really need to worry about your transportation, it's always under you or next to you.



I've gone to places I've never been before because of the bicycle, in fact, I am going to the Golden Gate Park /right now/ for some photos for this web page, just because/ I can/. Here are those photos!



Photos

Photos

Photos



I like that a bicycle not only gives you traveling freedom in San Francisco, but also /time freedom/ you don't have to worry about the time  (except for sundown for me!) since you can be anywhere you want at any time.





Bonus: Health benefits

I've been riding bicycles for about 8 months now and have lost 10 pounds doing nothing other than just riding bicycles to work. I eat more now because I weigh less. I like eating. Also, I drink WAY more water than I used to do so. There is nothing better than being really thirsty and drinking clean water! I don't really know the health benefits of riding bicycles daily because my goal was to save money (remember that MUNI ticket? Yea...).





I really don't like the gym. I like experiences, so I take any chance I get to go on a bicycle or on a hike. Blake Lively





Securing your bike



When I was a kid I used to pray every night for a new bicycle. Then I realised that the Lord doesn't work that way so I stole one and asked Him to forgive me. Emo Philips



The second biggest downside to bicycling is theft. There is nothing worse than your ride home getting stolen. Stealing bikes is easier than stealing a car. A car can be tracked down if not taken apart, it's much more visible. A bike is much lighter, smaller, and easier to take apart. Bikes get stolen and that is part of life, but there is a bright light at the end of the tunnel. Most workplaces now have caged bicycle rooms. There are more cameras on the streets to deter thieves. Even technology lets you track your bike if it's moved or act like a skunk by making it smell really bad if someone cuts your lock. Most of these new technologies cost a lot of money though, sometimes as much as a cheap bike. Here are some tips on securing your bike on a budget:



1) Ask your workplace if you are allowed to bring your bicycle in. Be respectful, bike tires are like markers, they will mark walls.

2) Use a quality U-Lock. When locking your bicycle, use the "triangle", Google Bicycle triangle lock and look at the images to get an idea of what it is.

3) Don't use a bike that you absolutely love, use a 'beater' bike. You can also make your bike look like crap by intelligently putting mud and fake rust in places that doesn't affect moving parts.

4) Lock your bicycle where there is a lot of traffic. Lock your bikes where other bikes are locked. If there is an easier looking target, your bike might be ignored.



Buying a bicycle



You can't buy happiness, but you can buy a bicycle and that's pretty close. -Anonymous



Buying a bicycle can be overwhelming, there is just so much stuff out there that it can get confusing. I recommend gathering some money you can "throw away", around $100. Then go on Craigslist and see anything that looks good (this is a large topic on its own since there are many "Walmart" brands, and a few quality brands of bicycles. Go visit the bicycle and move the parts, any squeaking can be a sign of a badly maintained bike. If it was stored for a long time, there might be rust on it that you want to clean. If the frame of the bicycle has rust it is generally not a great bicycle. Most bicycle are made of steel or aluminum. A quality steel bicycle is heavier, but can last forever because steel is workable. Aluminum is lighter and more common, but once it cracks, that's it for the bicycle. Generally, avoid carbon fiber bicycles, they are probably the worse for beginners as if you tighten a screw on it too hard, it will crack it, making it useless. Most light aluminum bicycles weight about 1 to 2 pounds more than a carbon fiber bicycle, so really, it's not worth it.



Before buying a used bicycle, ask if you can get the serial number of the bicycle to run online to see if it's stolen or not. Do not buy a stolen bicycle, you are only helping the stolen bicycle market. All bicycles come with a serial number, even my cheapo Vilano bicycle. If it's not stolen, check if the serial number was registered so you can transfer it to your name, if not, register it once you bought it. There are many "databases" online that can act as an authority on what serial number belongs to who. None of these are official government agencies though. They do help law enforcement though for when they find your bicycle, it helps them get it back to you.



In terms of the right size bicycle, check Google for "bicycle frame sizing" and find your "bicycle" size, if you are in between two numbers , go with the smaller one. A smaller bicycle is easier to adjust to your size than a larger one is. A bicycle is very adjustable so don't worry if it's exactly your size, just as long as it's around your size or a little smaller.



Most parts can be interchanged on a bicycle unless you got a specialty bicycle (like my Schwinn Loop), so I recommend focusing on the frame of the bicycle. Once you are done with the checking the frame for cracks, corrosion, and bends, you can move on to removable parts like rims, tires, chain, pedals, handlebars, shifters, brakes, etc. All these parts are interchangeable and there are very common standards that help with compatibility. The parts that can be adjusted are the seat, brakes, gear shifters, and tires. If any of these aren't immediately working properly, it's not a complete deal breaker, you can adjust or readjust these with a few simple tools (most of the time just a 5mm allen wrench and a Philips screwdriver).



Maintaining a Bicycle



Coming Soon!



Life is like riding a bicycle. To keep your balance, you must keep moving. Albert Einstein

